# Part VI
The human face of computing-Interacting with computers 

### The Human Face of Computing
Why are computers so hard to get along with?  Many people have stories about how difficult computers are to use, how they never seem to do what you really want them to, how they keep going wrong and make ridiculous mistakes.  Computers seem to be made for wizards, not for ordinary people.  But they should be made for ordinary people, because computers are everyday tools that help us to learn, work, and play better.
The part of a computer system that you interact with is called its “user interface.”  It’s the most important bit!  Although you might think of what the program actually does as the main thing and the user interface as just how you get into it, a program is no good at all if you can’t interact with it and make it do what you want.  User interfaces are very difficult to design and build, and it has been estimated that when writing programs, far more effort goes into the interface than into any other part.  Some software has excellent user interfaces, interfaces that need no complicated instructions and become almost invisible as you are drawn into using the application.  But countless software products which are otherwise very good have been complete flops because they have strange user interfaces.  And whole industries have been built around a clever interface idea—like the word processor or smartphones—that promotes access to computational functions which are really quite elementary in themselves.
But why do we have to have user interfaces at all?  Why can’t we just talk to our computers the way we do to our friends?  Good question.  Maybe someday we will; maybe not.  But certainly not yet: there are big practical limitations on how “intelligent” computers can be today.  The activities that follow will help you understand the problems of user interface design, and help you to think more clearly about the limitations of computers and be wary of the misleading hype that is often used to promote computer products.

#### For teachers
Computing is not so much about calculation as it is about communication.  Computing per se really has no intrinsic value; it is only worthwhile if the results are somehow communicated to the world outside the computer, and have some influence there.  And a lot of the activities in this book are about communication.  Representing data (Part I) shows how different kinds of information can be communicated to a computer or between computers.  Representing processes (Part III) is about how to communicate processes to a computer to tell it how to accomplish certain tasks—after all, “programming” is really only explaining to a computer, in its own language!  Cryptography (Part V) is about how to communicate in secret, or to communicate bits of secrets without revealing all.
The activities that follow are about how people communicate with computers.  While the rest of the book is based on well understood technical ideas, this part is not.  That makes it both easier, in that no special knowledge is required of the students, and more difficult, in that a certain level of maturity is needed to understand what the activities are about and relate them to a broader context.  These activities contain more detailed explanations than most of the others because it is necessary to give you, the teacher, enough background material to be in a position to help draw out some of the implications in class discussion.
There are two activities in this section.  The first is about the area known as the “human–computer interface,” commonly abbreviated to HCI.  In order to “unplug” this aspect of computing without depending on prior knowledge of a particular example of a computer system, we have invented a design exercise that does not really involve computers—but does introduce fundamental principles that are used in the design of human–computer interfaces.  Because human interface design is culture-dependent, there are not necessarily any “right” answers in this activity, which may frustrate some students.  The second activity is about the area known as “artificial intelligence,” or AI.  It involves a guessing game that stimulates students into thinking about what computers can and can’t do.

#### For the technically-minded
Human–computer interaction has become one of the hottest research areas in computer science as people realize how much the success of a software product depends on its user interface.  The subject draws heavily on a wide range of disciplines outside computer science, such as psychology, cognitive science, linguistics, sociology—even anthropology.  Few computer scientists have training in these areas, and HCI represents an important growth area for people who are interested in the “softer” side of the subject.
Artificial intelligence is a topic that often raises hackles and causes disputes.  In this book we have tried to steer a middle path between AI afficionados who believe that intelligent machines are just around the corner, and AI sceptics who believe that machines cannot in principle be intelligent. Our goal is to encourage students to think independently about such issues, and to promote a balanced view.
The activities here draw heavily on two eminently readable books, Don Norman's The design of everyday things and John Haugeland's Artificial intelligence: the very idea, which we enthusiastically recommend if you are interested in pursuing these issues further.
Computers involve another important kind of communication, one that is not touched upon in this book: communication between people who are building a computer system.  Students who learn about computers and make their way into the job market—perhaps having graduated in computer science from university—are invariably surprised by how much interpersonal communication their job entails.  Computer programs are the most complex objects ever constructed by humankind, with millions or perhaps billions of intricately interlocking parts, and programming projects are tackled by close-knit teams that work together and spend a great deal of their time communicating.  Once the product is complete, there is the job of communicating with customers through user manuals, courses, “help” phonelines, online support, and the like—not to mention the problem of communicating with potential customers through demonstrations, displays, and advertising.  We haven’t yet found a way to realistically “unplug” for students the interpersonal communication aspect of computing, so this book doesn’t address it.  But it is the kind of thing that computer professionals who are visiting a classroom may be able to describe from their own experience and bring out in discussion.

